>> Josh Long: Let's
talk about Java itself.
Java is, you know,
I'm going to be using Java throughout
the balance of this course.
I'm not sure how many people
are familiar with Java.
If you've come from another language,
then you might have some
misconceptions about Java.
Java is marked by being sort of the
stalwart language of the ecosystem, right.
It's the third most popular language these
days after arguably JavaScript or Python.
Who knows which one is which, but
one of those two in the first and
the second slot, and
then Java is usually the number three.
And one of the criticisms people have
levied against Java is that it's sort
of this anachronistic syntax that doesn't
sort of keep up with modern languages.
And I would concede to
a point that's true.
It is not known for having this
incredibly expressive syntax, but
it is much nicer than I think
a lot of people really appreciate.
And in particular in the last 10 years,
since Java 20, since Java 14,
which came out in 2014,
there's just been a number.
So Java 8 that came out in 2014,
there's just been a number of amazing
improvements to the language.
And one of the biggest single releases
was, in my estimation, Java 21,
which came out now a couple years ago,
right.
And in there they supported
not just virtual threads, but
also something called data
oriented programming.
So I wanted to talk to you about
what data oriented programming is,
because it's a different way to think
about writing code and writing systems.
Okay, so let's create a new project here.
I'm going to use just Java 24.
That's all I'm doing.
I could be using just Java 21 and
later, but
I'm going to use Java 24, hit enter
CD downloads and then there we go.
Uao, zip.
So briefly, there's a number of features
that are introduced in Java 21 and
later that change or
at least support the new paradigm.
Java is an object oriented language,
obviously it's functional ish.
It's not a pure functional language,
obviously, but it's got at least as
much claim to that as JavaScript or
Python do at this point, right.
It can support some idioms there.
It's not a pure functional
language though.
There are side effects everywhere, right.
But it's got some of that, but
it's not really what it's known for.
What's interesting is there's
a third paradigm here and
the Java language team are calling
it data oriented programming.
And the idea is that Java has historically
thrived in the world of large object
oriented systems, right.
You remember in the 90s
when Java first came out?
Remember this year marks 30
years since Java came out.
Java 1.0, 30 years of Java.
So when it first came out,
it was the bee's knees, right?
People were on CNN talking about
this new language called Java.
It was people.
Unless you were there, as I was.
I was young but I was there.
You don't remember the hysteria
that surrounded this language.
It was like the second coming it was
such a big deal and I don't know why.
It was just back then the idea of a
portable language that can run in bytecode
wasn't new.
I think it was a lot of
a function of marketing.
And one of the things
that seemed to help buoy
the noise that was being made
around it was object orientation.
Right at the time.
Do you remember in the early 90s C
was starting to become very popular.
You could buy new software and on the box
it would say now in object oriented
programming, now supporting OOP, right?
Like this is a thing.
Like I remember WordPerfect, Coral,
WordPerfect or Novell were perfect.
They actually had some discussion
around how they were moving to oop.
It's like a huge thing.
It was a big deal reusable objects,
who cares?
Nobody cares.
Now you could never like sell your
software and say, by the way,
it's written using objects.
But back then this is a big deal.
And I think it's a useful paradigm when
you have a large structured code base.
Certainly useful when you have large
structured code bases with deep
hierarchies of abstract types.
But increasingly, the way we build systems
today is in terms of messages that get
sent around over the wire or
from one module to another,
one component to another.
And in that world, objects aren't always.
The language hasn't really kept up,
it just needs to do better.
So in Java 21 they added
four new features.
Sealed types, pattern matching,
records and smart switch.
So let's take a look at a simple example.
Let's suppose I worked in a highly
regulated industry like a financial
services one or something like that.
And I've got a type here called a loan.
Now I want to build a implementation.
So I have a secured loan and
it implements loan and I have a class,
unsecured loan and implements loan.
Well, obviously these
are two different things and
maybe the unsecured loan
has some variability.
Maybe I have a float for
the interest rate, right?
Okay, but how can I make this
code a little Bit cleaner.
Well, first of all, if this is the only
state, then maybe this doesn't.
If the only state in this unsecured
loan is the variable that it passed into
the constructor, then maybe I could
use something called a record, right?
And records are tuples.
Other languages call them tuples.
But remember, naming is important, right?
Java is a nominal language.
Everything has a name.
Even our functional
programming support is nominal.
Functional programming, that is to say,
they thought about adding fully
unstructured lambdas to the language.
Like in Kotlin, for example,
you can have val,
my func int to string equals,
and then you do the my int to like that.
They thought about doing something like
that, which you can do in other languages.
They decided against it because
what is a int to string?
Well, you and I both know what that is.
It's a function.
But if you're working in a language
that makes a big deal out of names,
then this just looks like random noise
into string, doesn't tell you what it is.
So they said, okay, well, everything
in Java has to have an assigned type.
So you might have a ID converter,
which is actually
an interface which
returns a method given a.
Sorry, it returns a tostring or
whatever, convert, int, id,
that kind of thing, right?
And they decided, okay, if you have a
class or an interface called ID converter,
then you could create a lambda, right?
You could say ID converter,
ID converter equals that, right?
You could do something like that.
That's valid Java, but
you have to have a name.
You have to be able to assign it
to a type that you can refer to.
And the same is true for these records.
Records are tuples but
in Java everything has a name.
Okay, so this is a tuple, in that the only
state that you have, it's a carrier for
typed data.
But the thing has a name.
You can't just do bracket, bracket,
int, comma, string, comma, date, comma,
boolean, whatever, like you can in,
for example, Python.
Okay, so here's a record.
The records are final by default, right?
And the only state that you can pass
in comes from these constructors,
these component constructors, right?
And these are called
component fields here.
These things right here,
this is an interest rate.
I could have a string,
I could have an int, whatever.
I can do all these different things,
but they get passed in there.
So now I've got two different loans but
the problem is I could come along.
I don't want to have
the Sam Bankman fried problem.
I don't want to have backdoor loan,
implements loan.
And then I just sidestep
the validation method.
I do a no op on the validation or
something like that.
You can imagine this having a void
validate that nobody listens to,
or you just no op, but you stub it out.
So what you want to do is make sure that
you be very explicit about which things
can implement that type.
You do that with sealed hierarchies,
sealed loan permits, secured loan,
and unsecured loan.
Okay, now here this is barking at me.
It's saying, hey, I can still extend this.
Somebody could come along and
backdoor this by then creating another.
Not secured loan, but
extending secured loan.
So the language is saying,
you're cheating.
You can't do this.
You need to actually either
mark this as final or
explicitly permit this third type.
So final works.
Or if it's a record,
it's implicitly final.
So now I've got two different
types of my code base.
I want to create a message to display.
I want to create a message to display
to the user given a type of loan.
So loan.
How do I do this?
Well, I want to create a message
I'll create in a string.
I'm going to look at the loan.
I'll say if loan instance of secured loan.
And the old way would have been to do
something like this, you'd have to cast
it, cast it down, and you'd say,
message equals good job, nice loan.
Okay, or you'd say if loan
instance of an unsecured loan.
Var ul, there you go.
Okay, you need to pay more.
There you go.
So that can kind of work, but
this is a little tedious, first of all.
Well, down here, like I could put this.
I can dereference the field, right.
Is a lot, right?
There you go.
So I can get rid of all that.
Okay, so now I've got.
I'm dereferencing
the instance variable there.
I don't actually need
But if I, if I did, it's very tedious
to have to do what I just did.
This is tedious too, though.
So now I'm actually
matching the pattern of.
Is this type an unsecured loan?
If it is, then I want to extract from
that pattern an attribute, a value.
So I can do that by using this new syntax
in Java 21 later to do a pattern match and
then an extract.
Pattern match, extract, right.
So I'm taking a pattern, I'm doing a smart
cast downcast to the thing in the scope,
but still is this good.
It doesn't feel like it's good.
And the reason it's not good is because
I've only got two cases, right?
It can only ever be.
We know that it's a secured loan and
an unsecured loan, but
the compiler doesn't actually stop
me from not caring about it, right?
That code will still pass,
it'll still compile, everything is fine.
And yet I've now failed to handle
one of the two possible cases there.
50% of my code coverage is missing and
the compiler has nothing to offer me here.
So how can I write this code in such
a way that I get that validation?
Well, I can use a smart switch.
So smart I can say loan case,
secured loan, good job, nice loan, and
then there you go.
Actually, that wrote it for me.
So what it's doing is I've got a switch,
I'm doing pattern matching there.
I'm not going to use that variable,
so I need to do that.
I'm extracting out the ul.
But the pattern matching is actually
smarter than just the type of the thing.
You can actually look at
the shape of the thing as well.
So since I only care about the interest,
let me just extract out the interest,
in which case I only
reference the interest there.
I'm saying match this unsecured loan and
that it has a component called interest,
and if so,
extract out within the scope of this,
block the float variable
into its own variable.
So I'm doing pattern matching and
extraction.
The same thing.
Of course what happens if I
comment out one of the cases?
Well, the compiler is saying, hey, that
doesn't cover all possible input values.
So I'm getting the compiler to make sure
I don't miss something obvious here.
Of course,
this could just be returned directly.
There you go.
So there's my pattern matching.
I'm using smart switch expressions,
I'm using records and sealed types.
These things play together to make it very
easy to deal with data as first class
citizens in the language.
Because remember, so much of what we do
is dealing with JSON or GRPC or Kafka or
RabbitMQ or GraphQL or whatever, right?
There's messages coming in from the wire.
Our systems are delineated in
terms of the API boundaries and
the data that they process.
The language has to be better
at this kind of stuff and
I think it's gotten a lot better
because of these new features.